README.md, before:

# ChessBuddy

[![OCaml](https://img.shields.io/badge/OCaml-%3E%3D%205.1-orange.svg)](https://ocaml.org)
[![Version](https://img.shields.io/badge/Version-0.0.2-blue.svg)](RELEASE_NOTES.md)
[![Status](https://img.shields.io/badge/Status-Proof%20of%20Concept-yellow.svg)](https://github.com/HendrikReh/chessbuddy)
[![Build Status](https://img.shields.io/github/actions/workflow/status/HendrikReh/chessbuddy/ci.yml?branch=main)](https://github.com/HendrikReh/chessbuddy/actions)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/github/license/HendrikReh/chessbuddy)](LICENSE)
[![PRs Welcome](https://img.shields.io/badge/PRs-welcome-brightgreen.svg)](https://github.com/HendrikReh/chessbuddy)
[![Collaboration](https://img.shields.io/badge/Collaboration-Guidelines-blue.svg)](docs/GUIDELINES.md)
[![Maintenance](https://img.shields.io/badge/Maintained%3F-yes-green.svg)](https://github.com/HendrikReh/chessbuddy/graphs/commit-activity)

Retrieval system for chess training that combines a relational database (PGN games) with a vector database (FEN embeddings). Features position-level ingestion with FEN tracking, automatic deduplication, and semantic search capabilities.

<p align="center">
  <a href="#components">Components</a> •
  <a href="#getting-started">Getting Started</a>
</p>

<p align="center">
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Dependencies-Lwt%20%7C%20Postgresql%20%7C%20pgvector-blue.svg" alt="Dependencies">
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Platform-Linux%20%7C%20macOS-lightgrey.svg" alt="Platform">
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Database-PostgreSQL%2016-336791.svg" alt="PostgreSQL">
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Chess-PGN%20Ingestion-8B4513.svg" alt="Chess PGN">
</p>

## Components

- **PostgreSQL + pgvector**: Stores players, games, moves, and embeddings. Launch via `docker-compose up -d`.
- **OCaml ingestion service**: Streams PGNs, preserves comments/variations/NAGs per move, generates placeholder-board FENs with accurate metadata, and persists relational rows plus embeddings.
- **FEN Generator**: Produces placeholder-board FEN strings while keeping side-to-move, castling rights, and en-passant squares aligned with the recorded move metadata.
- **Schema definition**: `sql/schema.sql` can be applied to the Postgres instance to bootstrap tables, indexes, and helper views/materialized views for thematic queries.

## Performance

Benchmarked on [TWIC 1611](https://theweekinchess.com/twic) (4.2MB, 4,875 games):

- **Ingestion**: 5:27 minutes (~15 games/sec, ~1,310 positions/sec)
- **Positions tracked**: 428,853 move-level entries
- **FEN deduplication**: 99.93% (301 unique positions)
- **Players**: 2,047 with 100% FIDE ID coverage
- **Embeddings**: 301 (one per unique FEN)

## Getting started

1. Start the database and apply the schema:

   ```bash
   docker-compose up -d
   psql "postgresql://chess:chess@localhost:5433/chessbuddy" -f sql/schema.sql
   ```

2. Install dependencies (requires OCaml 5.x):

   ```bash
   opam switch create . 5.1.1
   opam install . --deps-only
   dune build
   ```

3. Run ingestion:

   ```bash
   dune exec bin/ingest.exe -- \
     --db-uri postgresql://chess:chess@localhost:5433/chessbuddy \
     --pgn path/to/games.pgn \
     --batch-label "mega-2024"
   ```

The executable streams PGN games, generates placeholder FENs for each position, deduplicates positions, produces embeddings (via a pluggable provider), and persists metadata ready for hybrid SQL + vector search queries.

Checksums are computed from the PGN file contents, so re-ingesting an updated file properly records a new batch. Each stored move retains pre/post comments, side-variations, and NAGs, exposing richer annotations alongside the main line.

**Note**: Current version (0.0.2) uses placeholder FENs with starting position board state. Full position tracking requires integration with a chess engine library.

## Testing

### Manual PostgreSQL Testing

Verify relational and vector database functionality:

```bash
# Test relational operations
psql "postgresql://chess:chess@localhost:5433/chessbuddy" << 'EOF'
INSERT INTO players (full_name, fide_id) VALUES ('Test Player', '123456') RETURNING player_id;
SELECT * FROM players;
EOF

# Test vector operations (pgvector)
psql "postgresql://chess:chess@localhost:5433/chessbuddy" << 'EOF'
INSERT INTO fens (fen_text, side_to_move, castling_rights, material_signature)
VALUES ('test/fen/8/8/8/8/8/8 w - -', 'w', '-', 'TEST') RETURNING fen_id;

INSERT INTO fen_embeddings (fen_id, embedding, embedding_version)
SELECT fen_id, array_fill(0.1::float, ARRAY[768])::vector, 'test-v1'
FROM fens WHERE fen_text = 'test/fen/8/8/8/8/8/8 w - -';

-- Similarity search using cosine distance
SELECT embedding <=> array_fill(0.2::float, ARRAY[768])::vector as distance
FROM fen_embeddings LIMIT 1;
EOF
```

### Automated Testing

Set `CHESSBUDDY_REQUIRE_DB_TESTS=1` to force database-backed tests to run; otherwise they quietly skip when PostgreSQL is unavailable (useful in CI). See [docs/DEVELOPER.md](docs/DEVELOPER.md) for more details.

---

<p align="center">
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Version-0.0.2-blue.svg" alt="Version">
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Stage-Experimental-orange.svg" alt="Experimental">
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Made%20with-OCaml-orange.svg" alt="Made with OCaml">
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Tests-11%20passing-brightgreen.svg" alt="Tests">
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/github/last-commit/HendrikReh/chessbuddy" alt="Last Commit">
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/github/issues/HendrikReh/chessbuddy" alt="Issues">
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/github/stars/HendrikReh/chessbuddy?style=social" alt="Stars">
</p>

Commit message:

cli: add batch management commands and docs
- expand ingest CLI with subcommands for dry-run, batch listing, batch metrics, player sync, and health checks
- add FEN/player inspection helpers plus batch/health queries in the pipeline and database layer
- document CLI usage, batch labels vs. IDs in README/docs, and adjust ingestion dedupe logic
- drop auto help on subcommand invocations and ingest TWIC sample batch into fresh DB

README.md, after:

# ChessBuddy

[![OCaml](https://img.shields.io/badge/OCaml-%3E%3D%205.1-orange.svg)](https://ocaml.org)
[![Version](https://img.shields.io/badge/Version-0.0.2-blue.svg)](RELEASE_NOTES.md)
[![Status](https://img.shields.io/badge/Status-Proof%20of%20Concept-yellow.svg)](https://github.com/HendrikReh/chessbuddy)
[![Build Status](https://img.shields.io/github/actions/workflow/status/HendrikReh/chessbuddy/ci.yml?branch=main)](https://github.com/HendrikReh/chessbuddy/actions)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/github/license/HendrikReh/chessbuddy)](LICENSE)
[![PRs Welcome](https://img.shields.io/badge/PRs-welcome-brightgreen.svg)](https://github.com/HendrikReh/chessbuddy)
[![Collaboration](https://img.shields.io/badge/Collaboration-Guidelines-blue.svg)](docs/GUIDELINES.md)
[![Maintenance](https://img.shields.io/badge/Maintained%3F-yes-green.svg)](https://github.com/HendrikReh/chessbuddy/graphs/commit-activity)

Retrieval system for chess training that combines a relational database (PGN games) with a vector database (FEN embeddings). Features position-level ingestion with FEN tracking, automatic deduplication, and semantic search capabilities.

<p align="center">
  <a href="#components">Components</a> •
  <a href="#getting-started">Getting Started</a>
</p>

<p align="center">
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Dependencies-Lwt%20%7C%20Postgresql%20%7C%20pgvector-blue.svg" alt="Dependencies">
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Platform-Linux%20%7C%20macOS-lightgrey.svg" alt="Platform">
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Database-PostgreSQL%2016-336791.svg" alt="PostgreSQL">
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Chess-PGN%20Ingestion-8B4513.svg" alt="Chess PGN">
</p>

## Components

- **PostgreSQL + pgvector**: Stores players, games, moves, and embeddings. Launch via `docker-compose up -d`.
- **OCaml ingestion service**: Streams PGNs, preserves comments/variations/NAGs per move, generates placeholder-board FENs with accurate metadata, and persists relational rows plus embeddings.
- **FEN Generator**: Produces placeholder-board FEN strings while keeping side-to-move, castling rights, and en-passant squares aligned with the recorded move metadata.
- **Schema definition**: `sql/schema.sql` can be applied to the Postgres instance to bootstrap tables, indexes, and helper views/materialized views for thematic queries.

## Performance (Apple M2 Pro 16GB)

Benchmarked on [TWIC 1611](https://theweekinchess.com/twic) (4.2MB, 4,875 games):

- **Ingestion**: 5:27 minutes (~15 games/sec, ~1,310 positions/sec)
- **Positions tracked**: 428,853 move-level entries
- **FEN deduplication**: 99.93% (301 unique positions)
- **Players**: 2,047 with 100% FIDE ID coverage
- **Embeddings**: 301 (one per unique FEN)

## Getting started

1. Start the database and apply the schema:

   ```bash
   docker-compose up -d
   psql "postgresql://chess:chess@localhost:5433/chessbuddy" -f sql/schema.sql
   ```

2. Install dependencies (requires OCaml 5.x):

   ```bash
   opam switch create . 5.1.1
   opam install . --deps-only
   dune build
   ```

3. Run ingestion:

   ```bash
   dune exec bin/ingest.exe -- \
     --db-uri postgresql://chess:chess@localhost:5433/chessbuddy \
     --pgn path/to/games.pgn \
     --batch-label "mega-2024"
   ```

The executable streams PGN games, generates placeholder FENs for each position, deduplicates positions, produces embeddings (via a pluggable provider), and persists metadata ready for hybrid SQL + vector search queries.

4. Inspect batches:

   ```bash
   dune exec bin/ingest.exe -- batches list \
     --db-uri postgresql://chess:chess@localhost:5433/chessbuddy

   dune exec bin/ingest.exe -- batches show \
     --db-uri postgresql://chess:chess@localhost:5433/chessbuddy \
     --id <BATCH_ID>
   ```

   Each ingestion run records a row in `ingestion_batches` with two identifiers:
   - **Batch label** – human-friendly string you supply via `--batch-label` to tag the run (for example `dev-test`). Labels make logs easier to scan but are not required to be unique.
   - **Batch ID** – UUID primary key generated by PostgreSQL. This value links games, positions, and embeddings to the batch and is what CLI subcommands and SQL joins should use.

   Use the label for readability in dashboards or manual ops, and reach for the UUID when scripting, joining tables, or calling `batches show`.

Checksums are computed from the PGN file contents, so re-ingesting an updated file properly records a new batch. Each stored move retains pre/post comments, side-variations, and NAGs, exposing richer annotations alongside the main line.

**Note**: Current version (0.0.2) uses placeholder FENs with starting position board state. Full position tracking requires integration with a chess engine library.

## Testing

### Manual PostgreSQL Testing

Verify relational and vector database functionality:

```bash
# Test relational operations
psql "postgresql://chess:chess@localhost:5433/chessbuddy" << 'EOF'
INSERT INTO players (full_name, fide_id) VALUES ('Test Player', '123456') RETURNING player_id;
SELECT * FROM players;
EOF

# Test vector operations (pgvector)
psql "postgresql://chess:chess@localhost:5433/chessbuddy" << 'EOF'
INSERT INTO fens (fen_text, side_to_move, castling_rights, material_signature)
VALUES ('test/fen/8/8/8/8/8/8 w - -', 'w', '-', 'TEST') RETURNING fen_id;

INSERT INTO fen_embeddings (fen_id, embedding, embedding_version)
SELECT fen_id, array_fill(0.1::float, ARRAY[768])::vector, 'test-v1'
FROM fens WHERE fen_text = 'test/fen/8/8/8/8/8/8 w - -';

-- Similarity search using cosine distance
SELECT embedding <=> array_fill(0.2::float, ARRAY[768])::vector as distance
FROM fen_embeddings LIMIT 1;
EOF
```

### Automated Testing

Set `CHESSBUDDY_REQUIRE_DB_TESTS=1` to force database-backed tests to run; otherwise they quietly skip when PostgreSQL is unavailable (useful in CI). See [docs/DEVELOPER.md](docs/DEVELOPER.md) for more details.

---

<p align="center">
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Version-0.0.2-blue.svg" alt="Version">
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Stage-Experimental-orange.svg" alt="Experimental">
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Made%20with-OCaml-orange.svg" alt="Made with OCaml">
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Tests-11%20passing-brightgreen.svg" alt="Tests">
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/github/last-commit/HendrikReh/chessbuddy" alt="Last Commit">
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/github/issues/HendrikReh/chessbuddy" alt="Issues">
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/github/stars/HendrikReh/chessbuddy?style=social" alt="Stars">
</p>
