docs/DEVELOPER.md, before:

# Developer Guide

## Architecture Overview

Chessbuddy ingests PGN archives, normalizes player and game data, and persists
search-ready artifacts in PostgreSQL with pgvector. The diagram below maps the
primary modules and how data flows between them during a typical ingestion run.

```mermaid
flowchart LR
  CLI["Ingest CLI\n(bin/ingest.exe)"] -->|CLI args| Pipeline
  Pipeline["Ingestion Pipeline\n(lib/ingestion_pipeline.ml)"] -->|streams PGN| Pgn
  Pgn["PGN Source\n(lib/pgn_source.ml)"] -->|moves & metadata| Pipeline
  Pipeline -->|players & games| Database
  Pipeline -->|positions| Fen
  Fen["FEN Generator\n(lib/fen_generator.ml)"] -->|FENs| Pipeline
  Pipeline -->|embedding requests| Embedder
  Embedder["Embedder\n(lib/embedder.ml)"] -->|vectors| Pipeline
  Database["PostgreSQL\n(sql/schema.sql)"] -->|pgvector storage| Vector
  Pipeline -->|batch bookkeeping| Database
  Pipeline -->|position embeddings| Vector
  Vector["pgvector\n(fen_embeddings)"] -->|similarity search| Pipeline
```

- `bin/ingest.exe` reads CLI options, resolves the database URI, and hands the
  PGN source to the pipeline.
- `ingestion_pipeline.ml` coordinates database transactions, deduplication, and
  calls into supporting modules.
- `pgn_source.ml` parses headers and moves, emitting structured games.
- `fen_generator.ml` derives placeholder FENs for move-by-move tracking until a
  full engine-backed generator is wired in.
- `embedder.ml` converts unique FENs into 768-d vectors for semantic queries.
- `sql/schema.sql` defines relational tables and pgvector-backed similarity
  capabilities.

### Ingestion Sequence

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
  participant CLI as Ingest CLI
  participant Pipe as Pipeline
  participant PGN as PGN Source
  participant FEN as FEN Generator
  participant EMB as Embedder
  participant DB as PostgreSQL
  participant VEC as pgvector

  CLI->>Pipe: Parse CLI args and batch label
  Pipe->>PGN: Stream PGN headers and moves
  PGN-->>Pipe: Emit structured games
  Pipe->>DB: Upsert players and batches
  Pipe->>DB: Record game metadata
  Pipe->>FEN: Request FEN before/after move
  FEN-->>Pipe: Return placeholder FEN strings
  Pipe->>EMB: Deduplicated FEN needs embedding?
  EMB-->>Pipe: 768-d vector result (async)
  Pipe->>DB: Insert moves, positions, and joins
  Pipe->>VEC: Persist embeddings via pgvector
  DB-->>Pipe: Transaction commit
  Pipe-->>CLI: Report batch summary
```

The sequence highlights when each module participates, the order of database
writes, and how pgvector storage happens only after deduplicating FENs.

## CLI Usage

Running `dune exec bin/ingest.exe --` now expects a subcommand. Invoking the binary
without arguments prints the list of available commands, mirroring
`chessbuddy help`.

**Command summary:**
- `chessbuddy ingest --db-uri URI --pgn FILE [--batch-label LABEL] [--dry-run]`
  - Ingest a PGN file. `--dry-run` parses and reports counts without touching
    the database.
- `chessbuddy batches list --db-uri URI [--limit N]`
  - Show recent ingestion batches along with labels and timestamps.
- `chessbuddy batches show --db-uri URI --id UUID`
  - Display batch-level metrics (games, positions, embeddings).
- `chessbuddy players sync --db-uri URI --from-pgn FILE`
  - Upsert unique player identities from a PGN without recording games.
- `chessbuddy health check --db-uri URI`
  - Verify connectivity and required extensions (`vector`, `pgcrypto`,
    `uuid-ossp`).
- `chessbuddy help [COMMAND]`
  - Describe commands and their parameters; equivalent to running with no args.

**Examples:**
```bash
dune exec bin/ingest.exe -- ingest \
  --db-uri postgresql://chess:chess@localhost:5433/chessbuddy \
  --pgn data/games/twic1611.pgn \
  --batch-label dev-test

dune exec bin/ingest.exe -- ingest --dry-run \
  --db-uri postgresql://chess:chess@localhost:5433/chessbuddy \
  --pgn data/games/twic1611.pgn

dune exec bin/ingest.exe -- batches list \
  --db-uri postgresql://chess:chess@localhost:5433/chessbuddy
```

## PostgreSQL Testing

### Database Setup

The project uses PostgreSQL 16 with pgvector extension for hybrid relational + vector storage.

**Connection details:**
- Host: `localhost:5433`
- Database: `chessbuddy`
- User/Password: `chess/chess`
- Connection string: `postgresql://chess:chess@localhost:5433/chessbuddy`

**Starting the database:**

```bash
docker-compose up -d
psql "postgresql://chess:chess@localhost:5433/chessbuddy" -f sql/schema.sql
```

### Schema Components

The schema (`sql/schema.sql`) includes:

**Relational tables:**
- `players` - Player information with FIDE IDs and normalized names
- `player_ratings` - Historical ELO ratings (standard, rapid, blitz)
- `ingestion_batches` - Batch metadata with checksums for deduplication
- `games` - Game metadata with ECO codes, openings, results, and SHA256 hash for deduplication
- `games_positions` - Move-by-move position data with SAN/UCI notation and FEN tracking
- `game_themes` - Thematic analysis and motif tags

**Vector tables:**
- `fens` - Unique FEN positions with material signatures
- `fen_embeddings` - 768-dimensional embeddings for semantic search

**Features:**
- Foreign key constraints ensure referential integrity
- Unique constraints on FIDE IDs and normalized player names
- Generated columns for case-insensitive name matching and PGN hash (pgcrypto extension)
- 18 indexes for query optimization including GIN indexes for arrays
- Materialized view for latest player ratings
- pgvector extension for similarity search with HNSW indexes

### Ingestion Pipeline Notes

- Batch checksums are derived from the PGN file bytes, so updating an existing file produces a new ingestion batch instead of reusing the previous checksum.
- FEN rows now mirror the metadata stored alongside each move: the active color, castling rights, and en-passant square come straight from the generated `fen_after`.
- `Types.Move_feature` carries PGN annotations (comments, variations, and NAGs). They are available to downstream components such as future motif extraction or export tooling.

### Manual Testing

**Test relational operations:**

```bash
psql "postgresql://chess:chess@localhost:5433/chessbuddy" << 'EOF'
-- Insert player
INSERT INTO players (full_name, fide_id)
VALUES ('Magnus Carlsen', '1503014')
RETURNING player_id;

-- Insert rating
INSERT INTO player_ratings (player_id, rating_date, standard_elo, rapid_elo)
SELECT player_id, '2024-01-01', 2830, 2820
FROM players WHERE fide_id = '1503014';

-- Query with joins
SELECT p.full_name, pr.standard_elo
FROM players p
JOIN player_ratings pr ON p.player_id = pr.player_id;
EOF
```

**Test vector operations:**

```bash
psql "postgresql://chess:chess@localhost:5433/chessbuddy" << 'EOF'
-- Insert FEN position
INSERT INTO fens (fen_text, side_to_move, castling_rights, material_signature)
VALUES ('rnbqkbnr/pppppppp/8/8/8/8/PPPPPPPP/RNBQKBNR w KQkq -', 'w', 'KQkq', 'PPPPPPPPPPPPPPPP')
RETURNING fen_id;

-- Insert 768-dimensional embedding
INSERT INTO fen_embeddings (fen_id, embedding, embedding_version)
SELECT fen_id, array_fill(0.1::float, ARRAY[768])::vector, 'v1'
FROM fens WHERE fen_text LIKE '%rnbqkbnr/pppppppp%';

-- Test cosine similarity search
SELECT f.fen_text,
       fe.embedding <=> array_fill(0.15::float, ARRAY[768])::vector as distance
FROM fens f
JOIN fen_embeddings fe ON f.fen_id = fe.fen_id
ORDER BY distance
LIMIT 5;

-- Test L2 distance
SELECT fe.embedding <-> array_fill(0.2::float, ARRAY[768])::vector as l2_distance
FROM fen_embeddings fe LIMIT 1;

-- Test inner product
SELECT fe.embedding <#> array_fill(0.2::float, ARRAY[768])::vector as neg_inner_prod
FROM fen_embeddings fe LIMIT 1;
EOF
```

**Verify constraints:**

```bash
psql "postgresql://chess:chess@localhost:5433/chessbuddy" << 'EOF'
-- This should fail: wrong vector dimension
INSERT INTO fens (fen_text, side_to_move, castling_rights, material_signature)
VALUES ('test/8/8/8/8/8/8/8 w - -', 'w', '-', 'TEST')
RETURNING fen_id;

INSERT INTO fen_embeddings (fen_id, embedding, embedding_version)
SELECT fen_id, array_fill(0.5::float, ARRAY[512])::vector, 'test'
FROM fens WHERE fen_text LIKE 'test/%';
-- Expected error: "expected 768 dimensions, not 512"
EOF
```

## Automated Testing with Alcotest

Set `CHESSBUDDY_REQUIRE_DB_TESTS=1` locally when you want the suite to fail fast if the PostgreSQL container is missing. CI leaves this unset so tests fall back to skipping when the database is unavailable.

### Recommendation: Yes, Add Integration Tests

**Why Alcotest:**
- Lightweight and idiomatic for OCaml
- Good integration with Lwt for async database operations
- Clear test output and assertions
- Supports test fixtures and setup/teardown

**What to test:**

1. **Database module tests** (`lib/database.ml`):
   - Player upsert with/without FIDE ID
   - Name normalization and conflict resolution
   - Rating history insertion
   - Batch creation and deduplication
   - Game recording with foreign keys
   - Position and FEN upsert

2. **Vector operations**:
   - Embedding insertion with dimension validation
   - Similarity search operators (cosine, L2, inner product)
   - Vector constraint enforcement

3. **Integration tests**:
   - Full ingestion pipeline with test PGN files
   - Transaction rollback on errors
   - Concurrent insertions via connection pool

### Setup Example

**Add to `dune-project` dependencies:**

```ocaml
(package
 (name chessbuddy)
 (depends
  ...
  (alcotest :with-test)
  (alcotest-lwt :with-test)))
```

**Test structure:**

```
test/
├── dune                    # Test build configuration
├── test_suite.ml           # Test runner with Alcotest-lwt
├── test_helpers.ml         # Shared fixtures and utilities
├── test_database.ml        # Database module tests
├── test_vector.ml          # Vector operations tests
└── fixtures/               # (planned) Test data
    └── sample.pgn          # (planned) Sample PGN files
```

**Test database strategy:**

```ocaml
(* Use docker-compose with test database *)
let test_uri = "postgresql://chess:chess@localhost:5433/chessbuddy_test"

(* Setup: create test DB, apply schema *)
let setup () =
  let%lwt () = run_command "psql ... -c 'CREATE DATABASE chessbuddy_test'" in
  run_command "psql ... -f sql/schema.sql"

(* Teardown: drop test DB *)
let teardown () =
  run_command "psql ... -c 'DROP DATABASE chessbuddy_test'"

(* Or use transactions with ROLLBACK for isolation *)
let with_transaction pool test =
  Pool.use pool (fun conn ->
    let%lwt () = Db.exec "BEGIN" in
    let%lwt result = test conn in
    let%lwt () = Db.exec "ROLLBACK" in
    Lwt.return result)
```

**Example test case:**

```ocaml
let test_upsert_player () =
  Alcotest_lwt.test_case "upsert player with FIDE ID" `Quick (fun _switch () ->
    let pool = Database.Pool.create test_uri in
    let%lwt player_id =
      Database.upsert_player pool
        ~full_name:"Test Player"
        ~fide_id:(Some "123456")
    in
    let%lwt player_id2 =
      Database.upsert_player pool
        ~full_name:"Test Player Modified"
        ~fide_id:(Some "123456")
    in
    Alcotest.(check string) "same UUID"
      (Uuidm.to_string player_id)
      (Uuidm.to_string player_id2);
    Lwt.return ())
```

**Run tests:**

```bash
# With test database
docker-compose up -d
dune runtest

# Or with CI
dune build @runtest
```

### Benefits of Automated Tests

1. **Catch regressions** early when modifying `database.ml` queries
2. **Validate schema** constraints and indexes
3. **Document behavior** with executable examples
4. **CI integration** for pull request validation
5. **Confidence in refactoring** connection pool and query logic

### CI Integration

Add to `.github/workflows/ci.yml`:

```yaml
- name: Start PostgreSQL
  run: docker-compose up -d

- name: Wait for DB
  run: sleep 5

- name: Apply schema
  run: psql "$CONNECTION_STRING" -f sql/schema.sql

- name: Run tests
  run: dune runtest
```

## Current Test Status (v0.0.2)

### Test Suite: ✅ 11 Tests Passing

**Database Operations (6 tests):**
- ✅ Player upsert with FIDE ID
- ✅ Player upsert without FIDE ID (name-based)
- ✅ Rating record insertion with conflict resolution
- ✅ Batch creation and deduplication
- ✅ FEN position upsert and deduplication
- ✅ Full game recording with foreign key constraints

**Vector Operations (5 tests):**
- ✅ Embedding insertion with dimension validation
- ✅ Embedding updates (last write wins)
- ✅ Dimension constraint enforcement (768D required)
- ✅ Cosine similarity search (<=>)
- ✅ L2 distance calculation (<->)

**Run tests:**

```bash
docker-compose up -d
dune runtest
```

**Test files:**
- `test/test_database.ml` - Database module tests with Alcotest
- `test/test_vector.ml` - Vector search and embedding tests
- `test/test_suite.ml` - Test runner with Alcotest-lwt
- `test/test_helpers.ml` - Shared fixtures and utilities

## Ingestion Pipeline (v0.0.2)

### Move Processing Re-enabled

In v0.0.2, full move processing was re-enabled after implementing placeholder FEN generation. The ingestion pipeline now processes every position in every game.

**Previous behavior (v0.0.1):**

```ocaml
(* Move processing was disabled *)
(* let%lwt _game_id = record_game pool ~batch_id ~white_id ~black_id ~game in *)
let _ = embedder in (* Suppress unused warning *)
Lwt.return_unit
```

**Current behavior (v0.0.2):**

```ocaml
let%lwt game_id = record_game pool ~batch_id ~white_id ~black_id ~game in
Lwt_list.iter_s (fun move -> process_move pool ~game_id ~embedder ~move) game.moves
```

**Position processing workflow:**

1. **FEN deduplication** - Each position's `fen_after` is checked against `fens` table
2. **Position recording** - Move details stored in `games_positions` with reference to FEN
3. **Embedding generation** - Unique FENs get 768-dimensional embeddings via pluggable embedder
4. **Storage** - Embeddings stored in `fen_embeddings` with version tracking

**Benefits:**
- Complete position-level analysis across all games
- 99.93% FEN deduplication (TWIC 1611: 428,853 positions → 301 unique FENs)
- Semantic search capabilities via vector embeddings
- Move-by-move game reconstruction

### PGN Parser Improvements

#### Game Boundary Detection Fix

The PGN parser had a critical bug in v0.0.1 that merged all games into a single entry. This was fixed in v0.0.2 by tracking whether the parser is currently processing headers or moves.

**The bug:**

```ocaml
(* v0.0.1: Split on empty lines, causing games to merge *)
let rec accumulate acc current = function
  | [] -> List.rev (current :: acc)
  | line :: rest ->
      if String.trim line = "" then accumulate (current :: acc) "" rest
      else accumulate acc (current ^ "\n" ^ line) rest
```

Result: 4,875 games → **1 giant game** with 4.2MB of moves

**The fix:**

```ocaml
(* v0.0.2: Track header vs. move context *)
let rec accumulate acc current in_moves = function
  | [] -> List.rev (if current = "" then acc else current :: acc)
  | line :: rest ->
      let trimmed = String.trim line in
      if trimmed = "" then
        accumulate acc current in_moves rest
      else if String.length trimmed > 0 && trimmed.[0] = '[' then
        (* Header line *)
        if current <> "" && in_moves then
          (* New game starting - save current and start new *)
          accumulate (current :: acc) line false rest
        else
          (* Continue current game headers *)
          accumulate acc (current ^ "\n" ^ line) false rest
      else
        (* Move line *)
        accumulate acc (current ^ "\n" ^ line) true rest
```

**Key insight:** When we see a header line (`[Tag "Value"]`) after processing moves (`in_moves = true`), we know a new game is starting.

**Validation:**

```bash
# Before fix (v0.0.1)
psql chessbuddy -c "SELECT COUNT(*) FROM games;"
# Result: 1

# After fix (v0.0.2)
psql chessbuddy -c "SELECT COUNT(*) FROM games;"
# Result: 4,875
```

## FEN Generator Module (v0.0.2)

### Overview

The FEN generator (`lib/fen_generator.ml`) produces FEN notation for each position during PGN parsing. Current implementation uses placeholder board states.

**Module interface:**

```ocaml
(** Standard starting position FEN *)
val starting_position_fen : string

(** Generate placeholder FEN for a position after N moves *)
val placeholder_fen : ply_number:int -> side_to_move:char -> string
```

**Example usage:**

```ocaml
(* Move 1, White to move *)
Fen_generator.starting_position_fen
(* "rnbqkbnr/pppppppp/8/8/8/8/PPPPPPPP/RNBQKBNR w KQkq - 0 1" *)

(* Move 5, Black to move *)
Fen_generator.placeholder_fen ~ply_number:5 ~side_to_move:'b'
(* "rnbqkbnr/pppppppp/8/8/8/8/PPPPPPPP/RNBQKBNR b KQkq - 0 3" *)
```

**FEN components tracked:**
- Board position: Starting position (placeholder for all moves)
- Active color: Alternates w/b based on ply number
- Castling rights: Always "KQkq" (placeholder)
- En passant: Always "-" (none, placeholder)
- Halfmove clock: Always "0" (placeholder)
- Fullmove number: Computed as `(ply_number + 1) / 2`

**Integration:**

The FEN generator is called during PGN parsing in `lib/pgn_source.ml`:

```ocaml
let fen_before =
  if ply = 1 then Fen_generator.starting_position_fen
  else Fen_generator.placeholder_fen ~ply_number:(ply - 1) ~side_to_move:side
in
let next_side = if side = 'w' then 'b' else 'w' in
let fen_after = Fen_generator.placeholder_fen ~ply_number:ply ~side_to_move:next_side in
```

**Limitations:**
- Board position always shows starting position
- Castling rights not tracked (requires move validation)
- En passant not tracked (requires previous move analysis)
- Halfmove clock not tracked (requires capture/pawn move detection)

**Future enhancement:**

Integration with chess engine library (e.g., ocamlchess, shakmaty) will enable:
- Full board state tracking
- Actual castling rights computation
- En passant square detection
- Halfmove clock maintenance
- Move validation and legal position verification

## Performance Metrics (v0.0.2)

Ingestion benchmarks on TWIC 1611 (4.2MB PGN, 4,875 games):

- **Duration**: 5 minutes 27 seconds
- **Throughput**: ~15 games/sec, ~1,310 positions/sec
- **Positions ingested**: 428,853 move-level entries
- **Unique FENs**: 301 (deduplication: 99.93%)
- **Players tracked**: 2,047 with 100% FIDE ID coverage
- **Embeddings generated**: 301 (one per unique FEN)

**Database growth:**
- Games table: 4,875 rows
- Players table: 2,047 rows
- games_positions table: 428,853 rows
- fens table: 301 rows
- fen_embeddings table: 301 rows

Commit message:

base: adopt Base prelude across code and docs
- open! Base in all OCaml modules and replace legacy Stdlib helpers with Base equivalents, falling back to Stdlib.<module> only when needed
- align CLI, ingestion pipeline, and tests with Base utilities and iteration patterns
- refresh contributor docs (AGENTS.md, README.md, docs/DEVELOPER.md, docs/GUIDELINES.md) to spell out Base-only expectations

docs/DEVELOPER.md, after:

# Developer Guide

## Architecture Overview

Chessbuddy ingests PGN archives, normalizes player and game data, and persists
search-ready artifacts in PostgreSQL with pgvector. The diagram below maps the
primary modules and how data flows between them during a typical ingestion run.

```mermaid
flowchart LR
  CLI["Ingest CLI\n(bin/ingest.exe)"] -->|CLI args| Pipeline
  Pipeline["Ingestion Pipeline\n(lib/ingestion_pipeline.ml)"] -->|streams PGN| Pgn
  Pgn["PGN Source\n(lib/pgn_source.ml)"] -->|moves & metadata| Pipeline
  Pipeline -->|players & games| Database
  Pipeline -->|positions| Fen
  Fen["FEN Generator\n(lib/fen_generator.ml)"] -->|FENs| Pipeline
  Pipeline -->|embedding requests| Embedder
  Embedder["Embedder\n(lib/embedder.ml)"] -->|vectors| Pipeline
  Database["PostgreSQL\n(sql/schema.sql)"] -->|pgvector storage| Vector
  Pipeline -->|batch bookkeeping| Database
  Pipeline -->|position embeddings| Vector
  Vector["pgvector\n(fen_embeddings)"] -->|similarity search| Pipeline
```

- `bin/ingest.exe` reads CLI options, resolves the database URI, and hands the
  PGN source to the pipeline.
- `ingestion_pipeline.ml` coordinates database transactions, deduplication, and
  calls into supporting modules.
- `pgn_source.ml` parses headers and moves, emitting structured games.
- `fen_generator.ml` derives placeholder FENs for move-by-move tracking until a
  full engine-backed generator is wired in.
- `embedder.ml` converts unique FENs into 768-d vectors for semantic queries.
- `sql/schema.sql` defines relational tables and pgvector-backed similarity
  capabilities.

### Ingestion Sequence

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
  participant CLI as Ingest CLI
  participant Pipe as Pipeline
  participant PGN as PGN Source
  participant FEN as FEN Generator
  participant EMB as Embedder
  participant DB as PostgreSQL
  participant VEC as pgvector

  CLI->>Pipe: Parse CLI args and batch label
  Pipe->>PGN: Stream PGN headers and moves
  PGN-->>Pipe: Emit structured games
  Pipe->>DB: Upsert players and batches
  Pipe->>DB: Record game metadata
  Pipe->>FEN: Request FEN before/after move
  FEN-->>Pipe: Return placeholder FEN strings
  Pipe->>EMB: Deduplicated FEN needs embedding?
  EMB-->>Pipe: 768-d vector result (async)
  Pipe->>DB: Insert moves, positions, and joins
  Pipe->>VEC: Persist embeddings via pgvector
  DB-->>Pipe: Transaction commit
  Pipe-->>CLI: Report batch summary
```

The sequence highlights when each module participates, the order of database
writes, and how pgvector storage happens only after deduplicating FENs.

## Code conventions

- All OCaml modules must `open! Base` (or otherwise rely on Base-prefixed modules) so the Jane Street prelude is consistently applied across the codebase. Reach for `Stdlib.<module>` only when Base intentionally omits equivalent functionality (e.g., filename helpers).
- Keep module layout aligned with `lib/` and expose public interfaces through `lib/chessbuddy.ml`.

## CLI Usage

Running `dune exec bin/ingest.exe --` now expects a subcommand. Invoking the binary
without arguments prints the list of available commands, mirroring
`chessbuddy help`.

**Command summary:**
- `chessbuddy ingest --db-uri URI --pgn FILE [--batch-label LABEL] [--dry-run]`
  - Ingest a PGN file. `--dry-run` parses and reports counts without touching
    the database.
- `chessbuddy batches list --db-uri URI [--limit N]`
  - Show recent ingestion batches along with labels and timestamps.
- `chessbuddy batches show --db-uri URI --id UUID`
  - Display batch-level metrics (games, positions, embeddings).
- `chessbuddy players sync --db-uri URI --from-pgn FILE`
  - Upsert unique player identities from a PGN without recording games.
- `chessbuddy health check --db-uri URI`
  - Verify connectivity and required extensions (`vector`, `pgcrypto`,
    `uuid-ossp`).
- `chessbuddy help [COMMAND]`
  - Describe commands and their parameters; equivalent to running with no args.

**Examples:**
```bash
dune exec bin/ingest.exe -- ingest \
  --db-uri postgresql://chess:chess@localhost:5433/chessbuddy \
  --pgn data/games/twic1611.pgn \
  --batch-label dev-test

dune exec bin/ingest.exe -- ingest --dry-run \
  --db-uri postgresql://chess:chess@localhost:5433/chessbuddy \
  --pgn data/games/twic1611.pgn

dune exec bin/ingest.exe -- batches list \
  --db-uri postgresql://chess:chess@localhost:5433/chessbuddy
```

## PostgreSQL Testing

### Database Setup

The project uses PostgreSQL 16 with pgvector extension for hybrid relational + vector storage.

**Connection details:**
- Host: `localhost:5433`
- Database: `chessbuddy`
- User/Password: `chess/chess`
- Connection string: `postgresql://chess:chess@localhost:5433/chessbuddy`

**Starting the database:**

```bash
docker-compose up -d
psql "postgresql://chess:chess@localhost:5433/chessbuddy" -f sql/schema.sql
```

### Schema Components

The schema (`sql/schema.sql`) includes:

**Relational tables:**
- `players` - Player information with FIDE IDs and normalized names
- `player_ratings` - Historical ELO ratings (standard, rapid, blitz)
- `ingestion_batches` - Batch metadata with checksums for deduplication
- `games` - Game metadata with ECO codes, openings, results, and SHA256 hash for deduplication
- `games_positions` - Move-by-move position data with SAN/UCI notation and FEN tracking
- `game_themes` - Thematic analysis and motif tags

**Vector tables:**
- `fens` - Unique FEN positions with material signatures
- `fen_embeddings` - 768-dimensional embeddings for semantic search

**Features:**
- Foreign key constraints ensure referential integrity
- Unique constraints on FIDE IDs and normalized player names
- Generated columns for case-insensitive name matching and PGN hash (pgcrypto extension)
- 18 indexes for query optimization including GIN indexes for arrays
- Materialized view for latest player ratings
- pgvector extension for similarity search with HNSW indexes

### Ingestion Pipeline Notes

- Batch checksums are derived from the PGN file bytes, so updating an existing file produces a new ingestion batch instead of reusing the previous checksum.
- FEN rows now mirror the metadata stored alongside each move: the active color, castling rights, and en-passant square come straight from the generated `fen_after`.
- `Types.Move_feature` carries PGN annotations (comments, variations, and NAGs). They are available to downstream components such as future motif extraction or export tooling.

### Manual Testing

**Test relational operations:**

```bash
psql "postgresql://chess:chess@localhost:5433/chessbuddy" << 'EOF'
-- Insert player
INSERT INTO players (full_name, fide_id)
VALUES ('Magnus Carlsen', '1503014')
RETURNING player_id;

-- Insert rating
INSERT INTO player_ratings (player_id, rating_date, standard_elo, rapid_elo)
SELECT player_id, '2024-01-01', 2830, 2820
FROM players WHERE fide_id = '1503014';

-- Query with joins
SELECT p.full_name, pr.standard_elo
FROM players p
JOIN player_ratings pr ON p.player_id = pr.player_id;
EOF
```

**Test vector operations:**

```bash
psql "postgresql://chess:chess@localhost:5433/chessbuddy" << 'EOF'
-- Insert FEN position
INSERT INTO fens (fen_text, side_to_move, castling_rights, material_signature)
VALUES ('rnbqkbnr/pppppppp/8/8/8/8/PPPPPPPP/RNBQKBNR w KQkq -', 'w', 'KQkq', 'PPPPPPPPPPPPPPPP')
RETURNING fen_id;

-- Insert 768-dimensional embedding
INSERT INTO fen_embeddings (fen_id, embedding, embedding_version)
SELECT fen_id, array_fill(0.1::float, ARRAY[768])::vector, 'v1'
FROM fens WHERE fen_text LIKE '%rnbqkbnr/pppppppp%';

-- Test cosine similarity search
SELECT f.fen_text,
       fe.embedding <=> array_fill(0.15::float, ARRAY[768])::vector as distance
FROM fens f
JOIN fen_embeddings fe ON f.fen_id = fe.fen_id
ORDER BY distance
LIMIT 5;

-- Test L2 distance
SELECT fe.embedding <-> array_fill(0.2::float, ARRAY[768])::vector as l2_distance
FROM fen_embeddings fe LIMIT 1;

-- Test inner product
SELECT fe.embedding <#> array_fill(0.2::float, ARRAY[768])::vector as neg_inner_prod
FROM fen_embeddings fe LIMIT 1;
EOF
```

**Verify constraints:**

```bash
psql "postgresql://chess:chess@localhost:5433/chessbuddy" << 'EOF'
-- This should fail: wrong vector dimension
INSERT INTO fens (fen_text, side_to_move, castling_rights, material_signature)
VALUES ('test/8/8/8/8/8/8/8 w - -', 'w', '-', 'TEST')
RETURNING fen_id;

INSERT INTO fen_embeddings (fen_id, embedding, embedding_version)
SELECT fen_id, array_fill(0.5::float, ARRAY[512])::vector, 'test'
FROM fens WHERE fen_text LIKE 'test/%';
-- Expected error: "expected 768 dimensions, not 512"
EOF
```

## Automated Testing with Alcotest

Set `CHESSBUDDY_REQUIRE_DB_TESTS=1` locally when you want the suite to fail fast if the PostgreSQL container is missing. CI leaves this unset so tests fall back to skipping when the database is unavailable.

### Recommendation: Yes, Add Integration Tests

**Why Alcotest:**
- Lightweight and idiomatic for OCaml
- Good integration with Lwt for async database operations
- Clear test output and assertions
- Supports test fixtures and setup/teardown

**What to test:**

1. **Database module tests** (`lib/database.ml`):
   - Player upsert with/without FIDE ID
   - Name normalization and conflict resolution
   - Rating history insertion
   - Batch creation and deduplication
   - Game recording with foreign keys
   - Position and FEN upsert

2. **Vector operations**:
   - Embedding insertion with dimension validation
   - Similarity search operators (cosine, L2, inner product)
   - Vector constraint enforcement

3. **Integration tests**:
   - Full ingestion pipeline with test PGN files
   - Transaction rollback on errors
   - Concurrent insertions via connection pool

### Setup Example

**Add to `dune-project` dependencies:**

```ocaml
(package
 (name chessbuddy)
 (depends
  ...
  (alcotest :with-test)
  (alcotest-lwt :with-test)))
```

**Test structure:**

```
test/
├── dune                    # Test build configuration
├── test_suite.ml           # Test runner with Alcotest-lwt
├── test_helpers.ml         # Shared fixtures and utilities
├── test_database.ml        # Database module tests
├── test_vector.ml          # Vector operations tests
└── fixtures/               # (planned) Test data
    └── sample.pgn          # (planned) Sample PGN files
```

**Test database strategy:**

```ocaml
(* Use docker-compose with test database *)
let test_uri = "postgresql://chess:chess@localhost:5433/chessbuddy_test"

(* Setup: create test DB, apply schema *)
let setup () =
  let%lwt () = run_command "psql ... -c 'CREATE DATABASE chessbuddy_test'" in
  run_command "psql ... -f sql/schema.sql"

(* Teardown: drop test DB *)
let teardown () =
  run_command "psql ... -c 'DROP DATABASE chessbuddy_test'"

(* Or use transactions with ROLLBACK for isolation *)
let with_transaction pool test =
  Pool.use pool (fun conn ->
    let%lwt () = Db.exec "BEGIN" in
    let%lwt result = test conn in
    let%lwt () = Db.exec "ROLLBACK" in
    Lwt.return result)
```

**Example test case:**

```ocaml
let test_upsert_player () =
  Alcotest_lwt.test_case "upsert player with FIDE ID" `Quick (fun _switch () ->
    let pool = Database.Pool.create test_uri in
    let%lwt player_id =
      Database.upsert_player pool
        ~full_name:"Test Player"
        ~fide_id:(Some "123456")
    in
    let%lwt player_id2 =
      Database.upsert_player pool
        ~full_name:"Test Player Modified"
        ~fide_id:(Some "123456")
    in
    Alcotest.(check string) "same UUID"
      (Uuidm.to_string player_id)
      (Uuidm.to_string player_id2);
    Lwt.return ())
```

**Run tests:**

```bash
# With test database
docker-compose up -d
dune runtest

# Or with CI
dune build @runtest
```

### Benefits of Automated Tests

1. **Catch regressions** early when modifying `database.ml` queries
2. **Validate schema** constraints and indexes
3. **Document behavior** with executable examples
4. **CI integration** for pull request validation
5. **Confidence in refactoring** connection pool and query logic

### CI Integration

Add to `.github/workflows/ci.yml`:

```yaml
- name: Start PostgreSQL
  run: docker-compose up -d

- name: Wait for DB
  run: sleep 5

- name: Apply schema
  run: psql "$CONNECTION_STRING" -f sql/schema.sql

- name: Run tests
  run: dune runtest
```

## Current Test Status (v0.0.2)

### Test Suite: ✅ 11 Tests Passing

**Database Operations (6 tests):**
- ✅ Player upsert with FIDE ID
- ✅ Player upsert without FIDE ID (name-based)
- ✅ Rating record insertion with conflict resolution
- ✅ Batch creation and deduplication
- ✅ FEN position upsert and deduplication
- ✅ Full game recording with foreign key constraints

**Vector Operations (5 tests):**
- ✅ Embedding insertion with dimension validation
- ✅ Embedding updates (last write wins)
- ✅ Dimension constraint enforcement (768D required)
- ✅ Cosine similarity search (<=>)
- ✅ L2 distance calculation (<->)

**Run tests:**

```bash
docker-compose up -d
dune runtest
```

**Test files:**
- `test/test_database.ml` - Database module tests with Alcotest
- `test/test_vector.ml` - Vector search and embedding tests
- `test/test_suite.ml` - Test runner with Alcotest-lwt
- `test/test_helpers.ml` - Shared fixtures and utilities

## Ingestion Pipeline (v0.0.2)

### Move Processing Re-enabled

In v0.0.2, full move processing was re-enabled after implementing placeholder FEN generation. The ingestion pipeline now processes every position in every game.

**Previous behavior (v0.0.1):**

```ocaml
(* Move processing was disabled *)
(* let%lwt _game_id = record_game pool ~batch_id ~white_id ~black_id ~game in *)
let _ = embedder in (* Suppress unused warning *)
Lwt.return_unit
```

**Current behavior (v0.0.2):**

```ocaml
let%lwt game_id = record_game pool ~batch_id ~white_id ~black_id ~game in
Lwt_list.iter_s (fun move -> process_move pool ~game_id ~embedder ~move) game.moves
```

**Position processing workflow:**

1. **FEN deduplication** - Each position's `fen_after` is checked against `fens` table
2. **Position recording** - Move details stored in `games_positions` with reference to FEN
3. **Embedding generation** - Unique FENs get 768-dimensional embeddings via pluggable embedder
4. **Storage** - Embeddings stored in `fen_embeddings` with version tracking

**Benefits:**
- Complete position-level analysis across all games
- 99.93% FEN deduplication (TWIC 1611: 428,853 positions → 301 unique FENs)
- Semantic search capabilities via vector embeddings
- Move-by-move game reconstruction

### PGN Parser Improvements

#### Game Boundary Detection Fix

The PGN parser had a critical bug in v0.0.1 that merged all games into a single entry. This was fixed in v0.0.2 by tracking whether the parser is currently processing headers or moves.

**The bug:**

```ocaml
(* v0.0.1: Split on empty lines, causing games to merge *)
let rec accumulate acc current = function
  | [] -> List.rev (current :: acc)
  | line :: rest ->
      if String.trim line = "" then accumulate (current :: acc) "" rest
      else accumulate acc (current ^ "\n" ^ line) rest
```

Result: 4,875 games → **1 giant game** with 4.2MB of moves

**The fix:**

```ocaml
(* v0.0.2: Track header vs. move context *)
let rec accumulate acc current in_moves = function
  | [] -> List.rev (if current = "" then acc else current :: acc)
  | line :: rest ->
      let trimmed = String.trim line in
      if trimmed = "" then
        accumulate acc current in_moves rest
      else if String.length trimmed > 0 && trimmed.[0] = '[' then
        (* Header line *)
        if current <> "" && in_moves then
          (* New game starting - save current and start new *)
          accumulate (current :: acc) line false rest
        else
          (* Continue current game headers *)
          accumulate acc (current ^ "\n" ^ line) false rest
      else
        (* Move line *)
        accumulate acc (current ^ "\n" ^ line) true rest
```

**Key insight:** When we see a header line (`[Tag "Value"]`) after processing moves (`in_moves = true`), we know a new game is starting.

**Validation:**

```bash
# Before fix (v0.0.1)
psql chessbuddy -c "SELECT COUNT(*) FROM games;"
# Result: 1

# After fix (v0.0.2)
psql chessbuddy -c "SELECT COUNT(*) FROM games;"
# Result: 4,875
```

## FEN Generator Module (v0.0.2)

### Overview

The FEN generator (`lib/fen_generator.ml`) produces FEN notation for each position during PGN parsing. Current implementation uses placeholder board states.

**Module interface:**

```ocaml
(** Standard starting position FEN *)
val starting_position_fen : string

(** Generate placeholder FEN for a position after N moves *)
val placeholder_fen : ply_number:int -> side_to_move:char -> string
```

**Example usage:**

```ocaml
(* Move 1, White to move *)
Fen_generator.starting_position_fen
(* "rnbqkbnr/pppppppp/8/8/8/8/PPPPPPPP/RNBQKBNR w KQkq - 0 1" *)

(* Move 5, Black to move *)
Fen_generator.placeholder_fen ~ply_number:5 ~side_to_move:'b'
(* "rnbqkbnr/pppppppp/8/8/8/8/PPPPPPPP/RNBQKBNR b KQkq - 0 3" *)
```

**FEN components tracked:**
- Board position: Starting position (placeholder for all moves)
- Active color: Alternates w/b based on ply number
- Castling rights: Always "KQkq" (placeholder)
- En passant: Always "-" (none, placeholder)
- Halfmove clock: Always "0" (placeholder)
- Fullmove number: Computed as `(ply_number + 1) / 2`

**Integration:**

The FEN generator is called during PGN parsing in `lib/pgn_source.ml`:

```ocaml
let fen_before =
  if ply = 1 then Fen_generator.starting_position_fen
  else Fen_generator.placeholder_fen ~ply_number:(ply - 1) ~side_to_move:side
in
let next_side = if side = 'w' then 'b' else 'w' in
let fen_after = Fen_generator.placeholder_fen ~ply_number:ply ~side_to_move:next_side in
```

**Limitations:**
- Board position always shows starting position
- Castling rights not tracked (requires move validation)
- En passant not tracked (requires previous move analysis)
- Halfmove clock not tracked (requires capture/pawn move detection)

**Future enhancement:**

Integration with chess engine library (e.g., ocamlchess, shakmaty) will enable:
- Full board state tracking
- Actual castling rights computation
- En passant square detection
- Halfmove clock maintenance
- Move validation and legal position verification

## Performance Metrics (v0.0.2)

Ingestion benchmarks on TWIC 1611 (4.2MB PGN, 4,875 games):

- **Duration**: 5 minutes 27 seconds
- **Throughput**: ~15 games/sec, ~1,310 positions/sec
- **Positions ingested**: 428,853 move-level entries
- **Unique FENs**: 301 (deduplication: 99.93%)
- **Players tracked**: 2,047 with 100% FIDE ID coverage
- **Embeddings generated**: 301 (one per unique FEN)

**Database growth:**
- Games table: 4,875 rows
- Players table: 2,047 rows
- games_positions table: 428,853 rows
- fens table: 301 rows
- fen_embeddings table: 301 rows
